
Banner logo

Join the WPWP Campaign to help improve Wikipedia articles with photos and win a prize
Hide
The Lord of the Rings
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the novel. For the film series, see The Lord of the Rings (film series). For other uses, see The Lord of the Rings (disambiguation).
"War of the Ring" redirects here. For other uses, see War of the Ring (disambiguation).
The Lord of the RingsFirst Single Volume Edition of The Lord of the Rings.gif
The first single-volume edition (1968)

    The Fellowship of the Ring
    The Two Towers
    The Return of the King

Author	J. R. R. Tolkien
Country	United Kingdom
Language	English
Genre	

    Fantasy
    Adventure

Publisher	Allen & Unwin
Published	

    29 July 1954 (The Fellowship of the Ring)
    11 November 1954 (The Two Towers)
    20 October 1955 (The Return of the King)

Media type	Print (hardback & paperback)
OCLC	1487587
Preceded by	The Hobbit
Followed by	The Adventures of Tom Bombadil

The Lord of the Rings is an epic[1] high-fantasy novel written by English author and scholar J. R. R. Tolkien. The story began as a sequel to Tolkien's 1937 fantasy novel The Hobbit, but eventually developed into a much larger work. Written in stages between 1937 and 1949, The Lord of the Rings is one of the best-selling novels ever written, with over 150 million copies sold.[2]

The title of the novel refers to the story's main antagonist, the Dark Lord Sauron,[a] who had in an earlier age created the One Ring to rule the other Rings of Power as the ultimate weapon in his campaign to conquer and rule all of Middle-earth. From quiet beginnings in the Shire, a hobbit land not unlike the English countryside, the story ranges across Middle-earth, following the course of the War of the Ring through the eyes of its characters, most notably the hobbits Frodo, Sam, Merry and Pippin.

Although generally known to readers as a trilogy, the work was initially intended by Tolkien to be one volume of a two-volume set, the other to be The Silmarillion, but this idea was dismissed by his publisher.[4][5] For economic reasons, The Lord of the Rings was published in three volumes over the course of a year from 29 July 1954 to 20 October 1955.[4][6] The three volumes were titled The Fellowship of the Ring, The Two Towers and The Return of the King. Structurally, the novel is divided internally into six books, two per volume, with several appendices of background material included at the end. Some editions combine the entire work into a single volume, per the author's original intent. The Lord of the Rings has since been reprinted numerous times and translated into 38 languages.

Tolkien's work has been the subject of extensive analysis of its themes and origins. Although a major work in itself, the story was only the last movement of a larger epic Tolkien had worked on since 1917,[7] in a process he described as mythopoeia.[b] Influences on this earlier work, and on the story of The Lord of the Rings, include philology, mythology, religion, the architecture of Oxford, England, and the author's distaste for the effects of industrialization, as well as earlier fantasy works and Tolkien's experiences in World War I.[9] The Lord of the Rings in its turn is considered to have had a great effect on modern fantasy; the impact of Tolkien's works is such that the use of the words "Tolkienian" and "Tolkienesque" has been recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary.[10]

The enduring popularity of The Lord of the Rings has led to numerous references in popular culture, the founding of many societies by fans of Tolkien's works,[11] and the publication of many books about Tolkien and his works. The Lord of the Rings has inspired, and continues to inspire, artwork, music, films and television, video games, board games, and subsequent literature. Award-winning adaptations of The Lord of the Rings have been made for radio, theatre, and film.[12] In 2003, it was named Britain's best novel of all time in the BBC's The Big Read. In 2015, the BBC ranked The Lord of the Rings 26th on its list of the 100 greatest British novels.[13]
Contents

    1 Plot summary
        1.1 The Fellowship of the Ring
        1.2 The Two Towers
        1.3 The Return of the King
    2 Frame-story
    3 Concept and creation
        3.1 Background
        3.2 Writing
        3.3 Poetry
        3.4 Influences
    4 Publication history
        4.1 Editions and revisions
        4.2 Posthumous publication of drafts
        4.3 Translations
    5 Reception
    6 Themes
    7 Adaptations
        7.1 Radio
        7.2 Film
        7.3 Television
        7.4 Stage
    8 Legacy
        8.1 Influence on the fantasy genre
        8.2 Music
        8.3 Impact on popular culture
    9 See also
    10 Notes
    11 References
    12 Further reading
    13 External links

Plot summary
See also: The Fellowship of the Ring, The Two Towers, and The Return of the King plot summaries
The Fellowship of the Ring

The narrative follows on from The Hobbit, in which the hobbit Bilbo Baggins finds the Ring, which had been in the possession of the creature Gollum. The story begins in the Shire, where Frodo Baggins inherits the Ring from Bilbo, his cousin[c] and guardian. Neither hobbit is aware of the Ring's nature, but Gandalf the Grey, a wizard and an old friend of Bilbo, suspects it to be the Ring lost by Sauron, the Dark Lord, long ago. Seventeen years later, after Gandalf confirms this is true, he tells Frodo the history of the Ring and counsels him to take it away from the Shire. Frodo sets out, accompanied by his gardener, servant and friend, Samwise "Sam" Gamgee, and two cousins, Meriadoc "Merry" Brandybuck and Peregrin "Pippin" Took. They are nearly caught by the Nazgûl, but shake off their pursuers by cutting through the Old Forest. There they are aided by Tom Bombadil, a strange and merry fellow who lives with his wife Goldberry in the forest.

The hobbits reach the town of Bree, where they encounter a Ranger named Strider, whom Gandalf had mentioned in a letter. Strider persuades the hobbits to take him on as their guide and protector. Together, they leave Bree after another close escape from the Nazgûl. On the hill of Weathertop, they are again attacked by the Nazgûl, who wound Frodo with a cursed blade. Strider fights them off and leads the hobbits towards the Elven refuge of Rivendell. Frodo falls deathly ill from the wound. The Nazgûl nearly capture him at the Ford of Bruinen, but flood waters summoned by Elrond, master of Rivendell, rise up and overwhelm them.

Frodo recovers in Rivendell under Elrond's care. The Council of Elrond discusses the history of Sauron and the Ring. Strider is revealed to be Aragorn, Isildur's heir. Gandalf reports that the chief wizard Saruman has betrayed them and is now working to become a power in his own right. The Council decides that the Ring must be destroyed, but that can only be done by sending it to the fire of Mount Doom in Mordor, where it was forged. Frodo takes this task upon himself. Elrond, with the advice of Gandalf, chooses companions for him. The Company of the Ring also called the Fellowship of the Ring, are nine in number: Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, Gimli the Dwarf, Legolas the Elf, and the Man Boromir, son of Denethor, the Ruling Steward of the land of Gondor.

After a failed attempt to cross the Misty Mountains over the Redhorn Pass, the Company take the perilous path through the Mines of Moria. They learn of the fate of Balin and his colony of Dwarves. After surviving an attack, they are pursued by Orcs and by a Balrog, an ancient fire demon. Gandalf faces the Balrog, and both of them fall into the abyss. The others escape and find refuge in the Elven forest of Lothlórien, where they are counselled by its rulers, Galadriel and Celeborn.

With boats and gifts from Galadriel, the Company travel down the River Anduin to the hill of Amon Hen. There, Boromir tries to take the Ring from Frodo, but Frodo puts it on and disappears. Frodo chooses to go alone to Mordor, but Sam guesses what he intends and goes with him.
The Two Towers

Uruk-hai sent by Saruman and other Orcs sent by Sauron kill Boromir and capture Merry and Pippin. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas debate which pair of hobbits to follow. They decide to pursue the Orcs taking Merry and Pippin to Saruman. In the kingdom of Rohan, the Orcs are slain by a company of Rohirrim. Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn Forest, where they are befriended by Treebeard, the oldest of the tree-like Ents. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn. There they unexpectedly meet Gandalf.

Gandalf explains that he slew the Balrog. Darkness took him, but he was sent back to Middle-earth to complete his mission. He is clothed in white and is now Gandalf the White, for he has taken Saruman's place as the chief of the wizards. Gandalf assures his friends that Merry and Pippin are safe. Together they ride to Edoras, capital of Rohan. Gandalf frees Théoden, King of Rohan, from the influence of Saruman's spy Gríma Wormtongue. Théoden musters his fighting strength and rides with his men to the ancient fortress of Helm's Deep, while Gandalf departs to seek help from Treebeard.

Meanwhile, the Ents, roused by Merry and Pippin from their peaceful ways, attack Isengard, Saruman's stronghold, and trap the wizard in the tower of Orthanc. Gandalf convinces Treebeard to send an army of Huorns to Théoden's aid. Gandalf brings an army of Rohirrim to Helm's Deep, and they defeat the Orcs, who flee into the forest of Huorns, never to be seen again. Gandalf offers Saruman a chance to turn away from evil. When Saruman refuses to listen, Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers.

After Saruman crawls back to his prison, Wormtongue drops a sphere to try to kill Gandalf. Pippin picks it up. It is revealed to be a palantír, a seeing-stone that Saruman used to speak with Sauron and through which Saruman was ensnared. Pippin is seen by Sauron. Gandalf rides for Minas Tirith, chief city of Gondor, taking Pippin with him.

Frodo and Sam capture Gollum, who has followed them from Moria. They force him to guide them to Mordor. They find that the Black Gate of Mordor is too well guarded, so instead they travel to a secret way Gollum knows. On the way, they encounter Faramir, who, unlike his brother Boromir, resists the temptation to seize the Ring. Gollum – who is torn between his loyalty to Frodo and his desire for the Ring – betrays Frodo by leading him to the great spider Shelob in the tunnels of Cirith Ungol. Frodo falls to Shelob's sting. But with the help of Galadriel's gifts, Sam fights off the spider. Believing Frodo to be dead, Sam takes the Ring to continue the quest alone. Orcs find Frodo; Sam overhears them and learns that Frodo is still alive.
The Return of the King

Sauron sends a great army against Gondor. Gandalf arrives at Minas Tirith to warn Denethor of the attack, while Théoden musters the Rohirrim to ride to Gondor's aid. Minas Tirith is besieged. Denethor is deceived by Sauron and falls into despair. He burns himself alive on a pyre, nearly taking his son Faramir with him. Aragorn, accompanied by Legolas, Gimli and the Rangers of the North, takes the Paths of the Dead to recruit the Dead Men of Dunharrow, who are bound by a curse which denies them rest until they fulfil their ancient forsworn oath to fight for the King of Gondor.

Following Aragorn, the Army of the Dead strikes terror into the Corsairs of Umbar invading southern Gondor. Aragorn defeats the Corsairs and uses their ships to transport the men of southern Gondor up the Anduin, reaching Minas Tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle. Théoden's niece Éowyn, who joined the army in disguise, slays the Lord of the Nazgûl with help from Merry. Together, Gondor and Rohan defeat Sauron's army in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, though at great cost. Théoden is killed, and Éowyn and Merry are wounded.

Meanwhile, Sam rescues Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol. They set out across Mordor. Aragorn leads an army of men from Gondor and Rohan to march on the Black Gate to distract Sauron from his true danger. His army is vastly outnumbered by the great might of Sauron. Frodo and Sam reach the edge of the Cracks of Doom, but Frodo cannot resist the Ring any longer. He claims it for himself and puts it on his finger.

Gollum suddenly reappears. He struggles with Frodo and bites off Frodo's finger with the Ring still on it. Celebrating wildly, Gollum loses his footing and falls into the Fire, taking the Ring with him. When the Ring is destroyed, Sauron loses his power forever. All he created collapses, the Nazgûl perish, and his armies are thrown into such disarray that Aragorn's forces emerge victorious.

Aragorn is crowned King of Arnor and Gondor, and weds Arwen, daughter of Elrond. The four hobbits make their way back to the Shire, only to find that it has been taken over by men directed by one "Sharkey" (whom they later discover to be Saruman). The hobbits raise a rebellion and liberate the Shire, though 19 hobbits are killed and 30 wounded. Frodo stops the hobbits from killing the wizard after Saruman attempts to stab Frodo, but Gríma turns on Saruman and kills him in front of Bag End, Frodo's home. He is slain in turn by hobbit archers, and the War of the Ring comes to its true end on Frodo's very doorstep.

Merry and Pippin are celebrated as heroes. Sam marries Rosie Cotton and uses his gifts from Galadriel to help heal the Shire. But Frodo is still wounded in body and spirit, having borne the Ring for so long. A few years later, in the company of Bilbo and Gandalf, Frodo sails from the Grey Havens west over the Sea to the Undying Lands to find peace.

In the appendices, Sam gives his daughter Elanor the Red Book of Westmarch, which contains the story of Bilbo's adventures and the War of the Ring as witnessed by the hobbits. Sam is then said to have crossed west over the Sea himself, the last of the Ring-bearers.
Frame-story

Tolkien presents The Lord of the Rings within a fictional frame-story where he is not the original author, but merely the translator of part of an ancient document, the Red Book of Westmarch. Various details of the frame-story appear in the Prologue, its 'Note on Shire Records', and in the Appendices, notably Appendix F. In this frame-story, the Red Book is also the source of Tolkien's other works relating to Middle-earth: The Hobbit, The Silmarillion, and The Adventures of Tom Bombadil.[14]
Concept and creation
Background

The Lord of the Rings started as a sequel to J. R. R. Tolkien's work The Hobbit, published in 1937.[15] The popularity of The Hobbit had led George Allen & Unwin, the publishers, to request a sequel. Tolkien warned them that he wrote quite slowly, and responded with several stories he had already developed. Having rejected his contemporary drafts for The Silmarillion, putting on hold Roverandom, and accepting Farmer Giles of Ham, Allen & Unwin thought more stories about hobbits would be popular.[16] So at the age of 45, Tolkien began writing the story that would become The Lord of the Rings. The story would not be finished until 12 years later, in 1949, and would not be fully published until 1955, when Tolkien was 63 years old.
Writing

Persuaded by his publishers, he started "a new Hobbit" in December 1937.[15] After several false starts, the story of the One Ring emerged. The idea for the first chapter ("A Long-Expected Party") arrived fully formed, although the reasons behind Bilbo's disappearance, the significance of the Ring, and the title The Lord of the Rings did not arrive until the spring of 1938.[15] Originally, he planned to write a story in which Bilbo had used up all his treasure and was looking for another adventure to gain more; however, he remembered the Ring and its powers and thought that would be a better focus for the new work.[15] As the story progressed, he also brought in elements from The Silmarillion mythology.[17]

Writing was slow, because Tolkien had a full-time academic position teaching linguistics (with a focus on languages with linguistic elements he incorporated into his books, such as Old English).[18] "I have spent nearly all the vacation-times of seventeen years examining [...] Writing stories in prose or verse has been stolen, often guiltily, from time already mortgaged..."[19] Tolkien abandoned The Lord of the Rings during most of 1943 and only restarted it in April 1944,[15] as a serial for his son Christopher Tolkien, who was sent chapters as they were written while he was serving in South Africa with the Royal Air Force. Tolkien made another major effort in 1946, and showed the manuscript to his publishers in 1947.[15] The story was effectively finished the next year, but Tolkien did not complete the revision of earlier parts of the work until 1949.[15] The original manuscripts, which total 9,250 pages, now reside in the J. R. R. Tolkien Collection at Marquette University.[20]
Poetry
Main article: Poetry in The Lord of the Rings

Unusually for 20th century novels, the prose narrative is supplemented throughout by over 60 pieces of poetry. These include verse and songs of many genres: for wandering, marching to war, drinking, and having a bath; narrating ancient myths, riddles, prophecies, and magical incantations; of praise and lament (elegy). Some, such as riddles, charms, elegies, and narrating heroic actions are found in Old English poetry.[21] Scholars have stated that the poetry is essential for the fiction to work aesthetically and thematically; it adds information not given in the prose; and it brings out characters and their backgrounds.[22][23] The poetry has been judged to be of high technical skill, which Tolkien carried across into his prose, for instance writing much of Tom Bombadil's speech in metre.[24]
Influences
Main article: J. R. R. Tolkien's influences

The influence of the Welsh language, which Tolkien had learned, is summarized in his essay English and Welsh: "If I may once more refer to my work. The Lord of the Rings, in evidence: the names of persons and places in this story were mainly composed on patterns deliberately modelled on those of Welsh (closely similar but not identical). This element in the tale has given perhaps more pleasure to more readers than anything else in it."[25]

The Lord of the Rings developed as a personal exploration by Tolkien of his interests in philology, religion (particularly Catholicism[26]), fairy tales, Norse and general Germanic mythology,[27][28] and also Celtic,[29][better source needed] Slavic,[30][31][32] Persian,[33] Greek,[34] and Finnish mythology.[35] Tolkien acknowledged, and external critics have verified, the influences of George MacDonald and William Morris[36] and the Anglo-Saxon poem Beowulf.[37] The question of a direct influence of Wagner's The Nibelung's Ring on Tolkien's work is debated by critics.
The corner of a street with a public house called The Ivy Bush on the right side. In the background two tall brick towers can be seen further left.
Mentioned at the beginning of The Lord of the Rings, the Ivy Bush[38] is the closest public house to Birmingham Oratory which Tolkien attended while living near Edgbaston Reservoir. Perrott's Folly is nearby.

Tolkien included neither any explicit religion nor cult in his work. Rather the themes, moral philosophy, and cosmology of The Lord of the Rings reflect his Catholic worldview. In one of his letters Tolkien states, "The Lord of the Rings is of course a fundamentally religious and Catholic work; unconsciously so at first, but consciously in the revision. That is why I have not put in, or have cut out, practically all references to anything like 'religion', to cults or practices, in the imaginary world. For the religious element is absorbed into the story and the symbolism."[26]

Some locations and characters were inspired by Tolkien's childhood in Birmingham, where he first lived near Sarehole Mill, and later near Edgbaston Reservoir.[39] There are also hints of the Black Country, which is within easy reach of northwest Edgbaston. This shows in such names as "Underhill", and the description of Saruman's industrialization of Isengard and The Shire. It has been suggested that the Shire and its surroundings were based on the countryside around Stonyhurst College in Lancashire where Tolkien frequently stayed during the 1940s, but this claim is disputed by reputable Tolkien scholars.[40][41] The work was influenced by the effects of his military service during World War I, to the point that one critic diagnosed Frodo as suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder, which was called "shell-shock" at the Battle of the Somme, in which Tolkien served.[42]
Publication history

A dispute with his publisher, George Allen & Unwin, led to the book being offered to Collins in 1950. Tolkien intended The Silmarillion (itself largely unrevised at this point) to be published along with The Lord of the Rings, but A&U were unwilling to do this. After Milton Waldman, his contact at Collins, expressed the belief that The Lord of the Rings itself "urgently wanted cutting", Tolkien eventually demanded that they publish the book in 1952.[43] Collins did not; and so Tolkien wrote to Allen and Unwin, saying, "I would gladly consider the publication of any part of the stuff", fearing his work would never see the light of day.[15]

For publication, the book was divided into three volumes to minimize any potential financial loss due to the high cost of type-setting and modest anticipated sales: The Fellowship of the Ring (Books I and II), The Two Towers (Books III and IV), and The Return of the King (Books V and VI plus six appendices).[44] Delays in producing appendices, maps and especially an index led to the volumes being published later than originally hoped – on 29 July 1954, on 11 November 1954 and on 20 October 1955 respectively in the United Kingdom. In the United States, Houghton Mifflin published The Fellowship of the Ring on 21 October 1954, The Two Towers on 21 April 1955, and The Return of the King on 5 January 1956.[45]

The Return of the King was especially delayed due to Tolkien revising the ending and preparing appendices (some of which had to be left out because of space constraints). Tolkien did not like the title The Return of the King, believing it gave away too much of the storyline, but deferred to his publisher's preference.[46] Tolkien wrote that the title The Two Towers "can be left ambiguous,"[47] but also considered naming the two as Orthanc and Barad-dûr, Minas Tirith and Barad-dûr, or Orthanc and the Tower of Cirith Ungol.[47][48] However, a month later he wrote a note published at the end of The Fellowship of the Ring and later drew a cover illustration, both of which identified the pair as Minas Morgul and Orthanc.[49][50]

Tolkien was initially opposed to titles being given to each two-book volume, preferring instead the use of book titles: e.g. The Lord of the Rings: Vol. 1, The Ring Sets Out and The Ring Goes South; Vol. 2, The Treason of Isengard and The Ring Goes East; Vol. 3, The War of the Ring and The End of the Third Age. However these individual book titles were later scrapped, and after pressure from his publishers, Tolkien initially suggested the titles: Vol. 1, The Shadow Grows; Vol. 2, The Ring in the Shadow; Vol. 3, The War of the Ring or The Return of the King.[51][52]

Because the three-volume binding was so widely distributed, the work is often referred to as the Lord of the Rings "trilogy". In a letter to the poet W. H. Auden (who famously reviewed the final volume in 1956[53]), Tolkien himself made use of the term "trilogy" for the work[54] though he did at other times consider this incorrect, as it was written and conceived as a single book.[55] It is also often called a novel; however, Tolkien also objected to this term as he viewed it as a heroic romance.[56]

The books were published under a profit-sharing arrangement, whereby Tolkien would not receive an advance or royalties until the books had broken even, after which he would take a large share of the profits.[57] It has ultimately become one of the best-selling novels ever written, with 50 million copies sold by 2003[58] and over 150 million copies sold by 2007.[2]

The book was published in the UK by Allen & Unwin until 1990 when the publisher and its assets were acquired by HarperCollins.[59][60]
Editions and revisions

In the early 1960s Donald A. Wollheim, science fiction editor of the paperback publisher Ace Books, claimed that The Lord of the Rings was not protected in the United States under American copyright law because Houghton Mifflin, the US hardcover publisher, had neglected to copyright the work in the United States.[61][62] Then, in 1965, Ace Books proceeded to publish an edition, unauthorized by Tolkien and without paying royalties to him. Tolkien took issue with this and quickly notified his fans of this objection.[63] Grass-roots pressure from these fans became so great that Ace Books withdrew their edition and made a nominal payment to Tolkien.[64][65]

Authorized editions followed from Ballantine Books and Houghton Mifflin to tremendous commercial success. Tolkien undertook various textual revisions to produce a version of the book that would be published with his consent and establish an unquestioned US copyright. This text became the Second Edition of The Lord of the Rings, published in 1965.[64] The first Ballantine paperback edition was printed in October that year, and sold a quarter of a million copies within ten months. On 4 September 1966, the novel debuted on New York Times' Paperback Bestsellers list as number three, and was number one by 4 December, a position it held for eight weeks.[66] Houghton Mifflin editions after 1994 consolidate variant revisions by Tolkien, and corrections supervised by Christopher Tolkien, which resulted, after some initial glitches, in a computer-based unified text.[67]

In 2004, for the 50th Anniversary Edition, Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull, under supervision from Christopher Tolkien, studied and revised the text to eliminate as many errors and inconsistencies as possible, some of which had been introduced by well-meaning compositors of the first printing in 1954, and never been corrected.[68] The 2005 edition of the book contained further corrections noticed by the editors and submitted by readers. Further corrections were added to the 60th Anniversary Edition in 2014.[69]

Several editions, notably the 50th Anniversary Edition, combine all three books into one volume, with the result that pagination varies widely over the various editions.
Posthumous publication of drafts

From 1988 to 1992 Christopher Tolkien published the surviving drafts of The Lord of The Rings, chronicling and illuminating with commentary the stages of the text's development, in volumes 6–9 of his History of Middle-earth series. The four volumes carry the titles The Return of the Shadow, The Treason of Isengard, The War of the Ring, and Sauron Defeated.
Translations
Main article: Translations of The Lord of the Rings

The novel has been translated, with varying degrees of success, into at least 56 languages.[70] Tolkien, an expert in philology, examined many of these translations, and made comments on each that reflect both the translation process and his work. As he was unhappy with some choices made by early translators, such as the Swedish translation by Åke Ohlmarks,[71] Tolkien wrote a "Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings" (1967). Because The Lord of the Rings purports to be a translation of the fictitious Red Book of Westmarch, with the English language representing the Westron of the "original", Tolkien suggested that translators attempt to capture the interplay between English and the invented nomenclature of the English work, and gave several examples along with general guidance.
Reception
Main article: Reception of J. R. R. Tolkien

While early reviews for The Lord of the Rings were mixed, reviews in various media have been, on the whole, highly positive and acknowledge Tolkien's literary achievement as a significant one. The initial review in the Sunday Telegraph described it as "among the greatest works of imaginative fiction of the twentieth century".[72] The Sunday Times echoed this sentiment, stating that "the English-speaking world is divided into those who have read The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit and those who are going to read them."[72] The New York Herald Tribune also seemed to have an idea of how popular the books would become, writing in its review that they were "destined to outlast our time".[73] W. H. Auden, an admirer of Tolkien's writings, regarded The Lord of the Rings as a "masterpiece", further stating that in some cases it outdid the achievement of John Milton's Paradise Lost.[74] Kenneth F Slater [75] wrote in Nebula Science Fiction, April 1955, "... if you don’t read it, you have missed one of the finest books of its type ever to appear" [76]

New York Times reviewer Judith Shulevitz criticized the "pedantry" of Tolkien's literary style, saying that he "formulated a high-minded belief in the importance of his mission as a literary preservationist, which turns out to be death to literature itself".[77] Critic Richard Jenkyns, writing in The New Republic, criticized the work for a lack of psychological depth. Both the characters and the work itself are, according to Jenkyns, "anemic, and lacking in fibre".[78] Even within Tolkien's literary group, The Inklings, reviews were mixed. Hugo Dyson complained loudly at its readings.[79][80] However, another Inkling, C. S. Lewis, had very different feelings, writing, "here are beauties which pierce like swords or burn like cold iron. Here is a book which will break your heart." Despite these reviews and its lack of paperback printing until the 1960s, The Lord of the Rings initially sold well in hardback.[7]

In 1957, The Lord of the Rings was awarded the International Fantasy Award. Despite its numerous detractors, the publication of the Ace Books and Ballantine paperbacks helped The Lord of the Rings become immensely popular in the United States in the 1960s. The book has remained so ever since, ranking as one of the most popular works of fiction of the twentieth century, judged by both sales and reader surveys.[81] In the 2003 "Big Read" survey conducted in Britain by the BBC, The Lord of the Rings was found to be the "Nation's best-loved book". In similar 2004 polls both Germany[82] and Australia[83] also found The Lord of the Rings to be their favourite book. In a 1999 poll of Amazon.com customers, The Lord of the Rings was judged to be their favourite "book of the millennium".[84]

C. S. Lewis observed that the writing is rich in that some of the 'good' characters have darker sides, and likewise some of the villains have "good impulses".[85]
Themes
Main article: Themes of The Lord of the Rings

Although The Lord of the Rings was published in the 1950s, Tolkien insisted that the One Ring was not an allegory for the atomic bomb,[86] nor were his works a strict allegory of any kind, but were open to interpretation as the reader saw fit.[87][88]

A few critics have found what they consider racial elements in the story, which are generally based upon their views of how Tolkien's imagery depicts good and evil, characters' race (e.g. Elf, Dwarf, Hobbit, Southron, Númenórean, Orc), and how the characters' race is seen as determining their behaviour.[89][90][91] On the contrary, counter-arguments note that race-focused critiques often omit relevant textual evidence,[92][93][94] cite imagery from adaptations rather than the work itself,[95] ignore the absence of evidence of racist attitudes or events in the author's personal life,[92][95][96] and claim that the perception of racism is itself a marginal view.[96]

The opinions that pit races against each other most likely reflect Tolkien's criticism of war rather than a racist perspective. In The Two Towers, the character Samwise sees a fallen foe, a man of colour, and considers the humanity of this fallen Southron.[97] Director Peter Jackson, in the director's commentary of this scene, argues that Tolkien isn't projecting negativity towards the individual soldier because of his race, but against the evil authority that is driving them.[98] These sentiments, Jackson argues, arose from Tolkien's experience in the Great War and found their way into his writings to show the evils of war itself, not of other races.

Critics have also seen social class rather than race as being the determining factor in the portrayal of good and evil.[92] Commentators such as science fiction author David Brin have interpreted the work to hold unquestioning devotion to a traditional elitist social structure.[99] In his essay "Epic Pooh", science fiction and fantasy author Michael Moorcock critiques the world-view displayed by the book as deeply conservative, in both the "paternalism" of the narrative voice and the power-structures in the narrative.[100] Tom Shippey cites the origin of this portrayal of evil as a reflection of the prejudices of European middle-classes during the inter-war years towards the industrial working class.[101]

Other observers have cited Christian, specifically Catholic, themes in The Lord of the Rings.[102]

The book has been read as fitting the model of Joseph Campbell's "monomyth".[103]
Adaptations
Main article: Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings

The Lord of the Rings has been adapted for film, radio and stage.
Radio

The book has been adapted for radio four times. In 1955 and 1956, the BBC broadcast The Lord of the Rings, a 13-part radio adaptation of the story. In the 1960s radio station WBAI produced a short radio adaptation. A 1979 dramatization of The Lord of the Rings was broadcast in the United States and subsequently issued on tape and CD. In 1981, the BBC broadcast The Lord of the Rings, a new dramatization in 26 half-hour instalments. This dramatization of The Lord of the Rings has subsequently been made available on both tape and CD both by the BBC and other publishers. For this purpose it is generally edited into 13 one-hour episodes.
Film
Main article: Middle-earth in film

Filmmakers who attempted to adapt Tolkien's works include William Snyder, Peter Shaffer, John Boorman, Ralph Bakshi, Peter Jackson and Guillermo del Toro. Other filmmakers and producers who were interested in an adaptation included Walt Disney, Al Brodax, Forrest J Ackerman, Samuel Gelfman, Denis O'Dell and Heinz Edelmann.

Following J. R. R. Tolkien's sale of the film rights for The Lord of the Rings to United Artists in 1969, rock band The Beatles considered a corresponding film project. David Lean was approached to direct, and while intrigued, was busy with Ryan's Daughter. The next choice, Stanley Kubrick, had to first familiarize himself with the books, only to then say they were unfilmable due to their immensity.[104][105] Michaelangelo Antonioni was contacted, and Heinz Edelmann even offered doing it in animation, but the project fell apart.[106] British director John Boorman also tried to make an adaptation of The Lord of the Rings for United Artists in 1970. After the script was written, which included many changes to the story and the characters, the production company scrapped the project, thinking it too expensive and too risky.[107]

Two film adaptations of the book have been made. The first was J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings (1978), by animator Ralph Bakshi, the first part of what was originally intended to be a two-part adaptation of the story; it covers The Fellowship of the Ring and part of The Two Towers. A three-issue comic book version of the movie was also published in Europe (but not printed in English), with illustrations by Luis Bermejo.

The second and more commercially successful adaptation was Peter Jackson's live action The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, produced by New Line Cinema and released in three instalments as The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001), The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002), and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003). All three parts won multiple Academy Awards, including consecutive Best Picture nominations. The final instalment of this trilogy was the second film to break the one-billion-dollar barrier and won a total of 11 Oscars (something only two other films in history, Ben-Hur and Titanic, have accomplished), including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay. Jackson later reprised his role as director, writer and producer to make a prequel trilogy based on The Hobbit.

The Hunt for Gollum, a fan film based on elements of the appendices to The Lord of the Rings, was released on the internet in May 2009 and has been covered in major media.[108] Born of Hope, written by Paula DiSante, directed by Kate Madison, and released in December 2009, is a fan film based upon the appendices of The Lord of the Rings.[109]
Television

Rankin and Bass used a loophole in the publication of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings (which made them public domain in the US) to make animated TV specials based on The Hobbit, released in 1977, and a sequel based on the closing chapters of The Return of the King, which came out in 1980.

In 2017, Amazon acquired the global television rights to The Lord of the Rings for a multi-season television series of new stories set before The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings,[110] based on J.R.R. Tolkien's writings about events of the Second Age of Middle-earth.[111] Amazon said the deal included potential for spin-off series as well.[112][113] It was later revealed that the show will apparently be set in the early second age, during the time of the Forging of the Rings,[114] and will allegedly be a prequel to the live-action films.[115]

It was projected in 2018 to be the most expensive TV show ever produced.[116] Much of it will be produced in New Zealand.[117][118][119][120] The cast includes Robert Aramayo, Owain Arthur, Nazanin Boniadi, Tom Budge, Morfydd Clark (as Galadriel),[121] Ismael Cruz Córdova, Ema Horvath, Markella Kavenagh, Joseph Mawle, Tyroe Muhafidin, Sophia Nomvete, Megan Richards, Dylan Smith, Charlie Vickers, Daniel Weyman,[122] and Maxim Baldry.[123]
Stage

In 1990, Recorded Books published an audio version of The Lord of the Rings,[124] with British actor Rob Inglis – who had previously starred in his own one-man stage productions of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings – reading. A large-scale musical theatre adaptation, The Lord of the Rings was first staged in Toronto, Ontario, Canada in 2006 and opened in London in June 2007.
Legacy
Main article: Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien
Influence on the fantasy genre

The enormous popularity of Tolkien's work expanded the demand for fantasy fiction. Largely thanks to The Lord of the Rings, the genre flowered throughout the 1960s, and enjoys popularity to the present day. The opus has spawned many imitators, such as The Sword of Shannara, which Lin Carter called "the single most cold-blooded, complete rip-off of another book that I have ever read".[125] Dungeons & Dragons, which popularized the role-playing game (RPG) genre in the 1970s, features many races found in The Lord of the Rings, most notably halflings (another term for hobbits), elves, dwarves, half-elves, orcs, and dragons. However, Gary Gygax, lead designer of the game, maintained that he was influenced very little by The Lord of the Rings, stating that he included these elements as a marketing move to draw on the popularity the work enjoyed at the time he was developing the game.[126]

Because D&D has gone on to influence many popular role-playing video games, the influence of The Lord of the Rings extends to many of them as well, with titles such as Dragon Quest,[127][128] the Ultima series, EverQuest, the Warcraft series, and the Elder Scrolls series of games[129] as well as video games set in Middle-earth itself.

Research also suggests that some consumers of fantasy games derive their motivation from trying to create an epic fantasy narrative which is influenced by The Lord of the Rings.[130]
Music

In 1965, songwriter Donald Swann, who was best known for his collaboration with Michael Flanders as Flanders & Swann, set six poems from The Lord of the Rings and one from The Adventures of Tom Bombadil ("Errantry") to music. When Swann met with Tolkien to play the songs for his approval, Tolkien suggested for "Namárië" (Galadriel's lament) a setting reminiscent of plain chant, which Swann accepted.[131] The songs were published in 1967 as The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle,[132] and a recording of the songs performed by singer William Elvin with Swann on piano was issued that same year by Caedmon Records as Poems and Songs of Middle Earth.[133]

Rock bands of the 1970s were musically and lyrically inspired by the fantasy embracing counter-culture of the time; British 70s rock band Led Zeppelin recorded several songs that contain explicit references to The Lord of the Rings, such as mentioning Gollum in "Ramble On", the Misty Mountains in "Misty Mountain Hop", and Ringwraiths in "The Battle of Evermore". In 1970, the Swedish musician Bo Hansson released an instrumental concept album based on the book titled Sagan om ringen (translated as "The Saga of the Ring", which was the title of the Swedish translation of The Lord of the Rings at the time).[134] The album was subsequently released internationally as Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings in 1972.[134]

The songs "Rivendell" and "The Necromancer" by the progressive rock band Rush were inspired by Tolkien. Styx also paid homage to Tolkien on their album Pieces of Eight with the song "Lords of the Ring", while Black Sabbath's song, "The Wizard", which appeared on their debut album, was influenced by Tolkien's hero, Gandalf. Progressive rock group Camel paid homage to the text in their lengthy composition "Nimrodel/The Procession/The White Rider", and progressive rock band Barclay James Harvest was inspired by the character Galadriel to write a song by that name, and used "Bombadil", the name of another character, as a pseudonym under which their 1972 single "Breathless"/"When the City Sleeps" was released; there are other references scattered through the BJH oeuvre.

Later, from the 1980s to the present day, many heavy metal acts have been influenced by Tolkien. Blind Guardian has written many songs relating to Middle-earth, including the full concept album Nightfall in Middle Earth. Almost the entire discography of Battlelore are Tolkien-themed. Summoning's music is based upon Tolkien and holds the distinction of the being the only artist to have crafted a song entirely in the Black Speech of Mordor. Gorgoroth, Cirith Ungol and Amon Amarth take their names from an area of Mordor, and Burzum take their name from the Black Speech of Mordor. The Finnish metal band Nightwish and the Norwegian metal band Tristania have also incorporated many Tolkien references into their music. American heavy metal band Megadeth released two songs titled "This Day We Fight!" and "How the Story Ends", which were both inspired by The Lord of the Rings.[135] German folk metal band Eichenschild is named for Thorin Oakenshield, a character in The Hobbit, and naturally has a number of Tolkien-themed songs. They are not to be confused with the '70s folk rock band Thorin Eichenschild.

In 1988, Dutch composer and trombonist Johan de Meij completed his Symphony No. 1 "The Lord of the Rings", which encompassed 5 movements, titled "Gandalf", "Lothlórien", "Gollum", "Journey in the Dark", and "Hobbits". In 1989 the symphony was awarded the Sudler Composition Award, awarded biennially for best wind band composition. The Danish Tolkien Ensemble have released a number of albums that feature the complete poems and songs of The Lord of the Rings set to music, with some featuring recitation by Christopher Lee. In 2018, de Meij completed his Symphony No. 5 "Return to Middle Earth" in 2018, which has 6 movements titled "Mîri na Fëanor (Fëanor’s Jewels)", "Tinúviel (Nightingale)", "Ancalagon i-môr (Ancalagon, The Black)", "Arwen Undómiel (Evenstar)", "Dagor Delothrin (The War of Wrath)", and "Thuringwethil (Woman of Secret Shadow)".

Enya wrote an instrumental piece called "Lothlórien" in 1991, and composed two songs for the film The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring—"May It Be" (sung in English and Quenya) and "Aníron" (sung in Sindarin).

The 2020 modern classical album "Music for Piano and Strings" by pianist and composer Holger Skepeneit contains two Lord of the Rings-inspired pieces, "Laced with Ithildin" and "Nimrodel's Voice".
Impact on popular culture
"Welcome to Hobbiton" sign in Matamata, New Zealand, where the film trilogy was shot.

The Lord of the Rings has had a profound and wide-ranging impact on popular culture, beginning with its publication in the 1950s, but especially throughout the 1960s and 1970s, during which time young people embraced it as a countercultural saga.[136] "Frodo Lives!" and "Gandalf for President" were two phrases popular amongst United States Tolkien fans during this time.[137]

Parodies like the Harvard Lampoon's Bored of the Rings, the VeggieTales episode "Lord of the Beans", the South Park episode "The Return of the Fellowship of the Ring to the Two Towers", the Futurama film Bender's Game, The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius episode "Lights! Camera! Danger!", The Big Bang Theory episode "The Precious Fragmentation", and the American Dad! episode "The Return of the Bling" are testimony to the work's continual presence in popular culture.

In 1969, Tolkien sold the merchandising rights to The Lord of The Rings (and The Hobbit) to United Artists under an agreement stipulating a lump sum payment of £10,000[138] plus a 7.5% royalty after costs,[139] payable to Allen & Unwin and the author.[140] In 1976, three years after the author's death, United Artists sold the rights to Saul Zaentz Company, who now trade as Tolkien Enterprises. Since then all "authorized" merchandise has been signed-off by Tolkien Enterprises, although the intellectual property rights of the specific likenesses of characters and other imagery from various adaptations is generally held by the adaptors.[141]

Outside any commercial exploitation from adaptations, from the late 1960s onwards there has been an increasing variety of original licensed merchandise, from posters and calendars created by illustrators such as Barbara Remington[142], Pauline Baynes and the Brothers Hildebrandt, to figurines and miniatures to computer, video, tabletop and role-playing games. Recent examples include the Spiel des Jahres award-winning (for "best use of literature in a game") board game The Lord of the Rings by Reiner Knizia and the Golden Joystick award-winning massively multiplayer online role-playing game, The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar by Turbine, Inc..

The Lord of the Rings has been mentioned in numerous songs including "The Ballad of Bilbo Baggins" by Leonard Nimoy, Led Zeppelin's "Misty Mountain Hop", "Over the Hills and Far Away", "Ramble On", and "The Battle of Evermore", Genesis' song "Stagnation" (from Trespass, 1970) was about Gollum, Rush included the song "Rivendell" on their second studio album Fly by Night, and Argent included the song "Lothlorien" on the 1971 album Ring of Hands.

Steve Peregrin Took (born Stephen Ross Porter) of British rock band T. Rex took his name from the hobbit Peregrin Took (better known as Pippin). Took later recorded under the pseudonym 'Shagrat the Vagrant', before forming a band called Shagrat in 1970.

On 5 November 2019, the BBC News listed The Lord of the Rings on its list of the 100 most influential novels.[143]
See also

    iconSpeculative fiction portal iconNovels portal

    Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century
    Norse mythology in popular culture
    1954 in literature
    1955 in literature
    Literature of the United Kingdom

Notes

This is made clear in the chapter The Council of Elrond, where Glorfindel states: "[E]ven if we could [hide the Ring], soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his power towards it."[3]
Tolkien created the word to define a different view of myth from C. S. Lewis's "lies breathed through silver". Mythopoeia was also the title of one of his poems, first published in Tree and Leaf in 1988.[8]

    Although Frodo referred to Bilbo as his "uncle", the character is introduced in "A Long-expected Party" as one of Bilbo's younger cousins. The two were in fact first and second cousins, once removed either way (his paternal great-great-uncle's son's son and his maternal great-aunt's son).

References

Jane Chance (1980) [1979]. The Lord of the Rings: Tolkien's Epic. Tolkien's Art: A Mythology for England. Macmillan. pp. 97–127. ISBN 0333290348.
Wagner, Vit (16 April 2007). "Tolkien proves he's still the king". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 9 March 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2011.
Tolkien, J. R. R. (1954), The Fellowship of the Ring, The Lord of the Rings, Boston: Houghton Mifflin (published 1987), The Council of Elrond, ISBN 0-395-08254-4
Reynolds, Pat. "The Lord of the Rings: The Tale of a Text" (PDF). The Tolkien Society. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2015.
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #126., ISBN 0-395-31555-7
"The Life and Works for JRR Tolkien". BBC. 7 February 2002. Archived from the original on 1 November 2010. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
Doughan, David. "J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biographical Sketch". TolkienSociety.org. Archived from the original on 3 March 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2006.
Hammond, Wayne G.; Scull, Christina (2006), The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide: II. Reader's Guide, pp. 620–622
"World War I and World War II". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2006.
Gilliver, Peter (2006). The Ring of Words: Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-861069-6.
Gilsdorf, Ethan (23 March 2007). "Elvish Impersonators". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 December 2007. Retrieved 3 April 2007.
"The Lord of the Rings". The Lord of the Rings. Archived from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2012.
Ciabattari, Jane (7 December 2015). "The 100 greatest British novels". Time. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 8 December 2015.
Bowman, Mary R. (October 2006). "The Story Was Already Written: Narrative Theory in "The Lord of the Rings"". Narrative. 14 (3): 272–293. doi:10.1353/nar.2006.0010. JSTOR 20107391. "the frame of the Red Book of Westmarch, which becomes one of the major structural devices Tolkien uses to invite meta-fictional reflection... He claims, in essence, that the story was already written..."
"The Lord of the Rings: Genesis" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2008. Retrieved 14 June 2006. (This PDF contains no information about its source. It appears to be a lecture for a course on Tolkien by Assoc. Prof. Johann Köberl in the Department of English and American Studies at the University of Klagenfurt.)
Carpenter 1977, p. 195
Rérolle, Raphaëlle (5 December 2012). "My Father's 'Eviscerated' Work – Son Of Hobbit Scribe J.R.R. Tolkien Finally Speaks Out". Le Monde/Worldcrunch. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013.
Shammas, Michael (25 September 2019). "J.R.R. Tolkien, Old English, and the Creation of Middle-Earth". Rochester, NY. SSRN 3459810.
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #17, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
"J. R. R. Tolkien Collection | Marquette Archives | Raynor Memorial Libraries | Marquette University". Archived from the original on 19 December 2013.
Kullmann, Thomas (2013). "Poetic Insertions in Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings". Connotations: A Journal for Critical Debate. 23 (2): 283–309. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2020.
Higgins, Andrew (2014). "Tolkien's Poetry (2013), edited by Julian Eilmann and Allan Turner". Journal of Tolkien Research. 1 (1). Article 4. Archived from the original on 1 August 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2020.
Straubhaar, Sandra Ballif (2005). "Gilraen's Linnod : Function, Genre, Prototypes". Journal of Tolkien Studies. 2 (1): 235–244. doi:10.1353/tks.2005.0032. ISSN 1547-3163.
Zimmer, Paul Edwin (1993). "Another Opinion of 'The Verse of J.R.R. Tolkien'". Mythlore. 19 (2). Article 2.
Readanybooks website; English and Welsh essay Archived 3 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine; access-date 25 January 2014
Carpenter, Humphrey (1995). The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-05699-8, Letter no. 142, page 172
Shippey, T.A. (2005 [1982]). The Road to Middle-earth, 3rd ed., HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 0-261-10275-3.
T.A. Shippey: Tolkien, Author of the Century HarperCollins, 2000
Gunnell, Terry (13–14 September 2002). "Tívar in a timeless land: Tolkien's Elves". Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2012.
Lesniewski, Michal (3 September 2003). "Re Redigast Quid * cum Boromir?" (in Polish). Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2011.
Fisher, Jason (20 October 2009). "Slavic echoes in Tolkien – A response". Archived from the original on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2011.
Kuzmenko, Dmitry. "Slavic echoes in the works of J.R.R. Tolkien" (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 6 November 2011.
Allen, Elizabeth M. (1985). "Persian Influences in J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings". In Reilly, Robert (ed.). The Transcendent Adventure: Studies of Religion in Science Fiction/Fantasy. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. pp. 189–206. ISBN 0-313-23062-5.
Stanton, Michael (2001). Hobbits, Elves, and Wizards: Exploring the Wonders and Worlds of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 18. ISBN 1-4039-6025-9.
Handwerk, Brian (1 March 2004). "Lord of the Rings Inspired by an Ancient Epic". National Geographic News. National Geographic Society. pp. 1–2. Archived from the original on 16 March 2006. Retrieved 4 October 2006.
The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien. Letter #19, 31 December 1960
Shippey, Tom (2000). J. R. R. Tolkien Author of the Century, HarperCollins. ISBN 0-261-10401-2
The Fellowship of the Ring, Book 1, Chapter 1, paragraph 8.
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #178 & #303, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
Edwards, Paul. "In the Valley of the Hobbits". Travel Lady Magazine. Archived from the original on 22 June 2002. Retrieved 5 October 2006.
Hammond, Wayne G.; Scull, Christina (January 2010). "Truth or Consequences: A Cautionary Tale of Tolkien Studies". Wayne & Christina. Retrieved 2 July 2020.
Livingston, Michael (2006). "The Shellshocked Hobbit: The First World War and Tolkien's Trauma of the Ring". Mythlore. Mythopoeic Society. pp. 77–92. Archived from the original on 23 December 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011.
Carpenter, Humphrey (1977), Tolkien: A Biography, New York: Ballantine Books, p. 211 ff., ISBN 0-04-928037-6
Unwin, Rayner (1999). George Allen & Unwin: A Remembrancer. Ludlow: Merlin Unwin Books. pp. 97–99. ISBN 1-873674-37-6.
The Fellowship of the Ring: Being the First Part of The Lord of the Rings Archived 15 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine
"From Book to Script", The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Appendices (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2002.
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #140, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #143, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
"The second part is called The Two Towers, since the events recounted in it are dominated by Orthanc, ..., and the fortress of Minas Morgul..."
"Tolkien's own cover design for The Two Towers". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2020.
Tolkien, John Ronald (2006). The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. London: Harper Collins. pp. 167, 170, 173. ISBN 0261102656.
Tolkien, Christopher (2000). The War of the Ring: The History of The Lord of the Rings, Part Three. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-08359-6.
Auden, W. H. (26 January 1956). "At the End of the Quest, Victory: BOOK REVIEW, "THE RETURN OF THE KING"". New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 January 2016. Retrieved 21 February 2020.
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #163, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #149, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, #329, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
D.C. Drout, Michael (2007). J.R.R. Tolkien encyclopedia. CRC Press. ISBN 9780415969420.
Pate, Nancy (20 August 2003). "LORD OF THE RINGS FILMS WORK MAGIC ON TOLKIEN BOOK SALES". SunSentinel. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018.
Smith, Anthony (27 November 2000). "Rayner Unwin". Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 May 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2010.
Unwin, Rayner (1999). George Allen & Unwin: A Remembrancer. Ludlow: Merlin Unwin Books. p. 288. ISBN 1-873674-37-6.
"Betsy Wollheim: The Family Trade". Locus Online. June 2006. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 22 January 2011.
Silverberg, Robert (1997). Reflections & Refractions: Thoughts on Science Fiction, Science, and Other Matters. Grass Valley, Calif: Underwood. pp. 253–6. ISBN 1-887424-22-9.
Ripp, Joseph. "Middle America Meets Middle-earth: American Publication and Discussion of J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings" (PDF). p. 38. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2015.
Reynolds, Pat. "The Lord of the Rings: The Tale of a Text". The Tolkien Society. Archived from the original on 8 September 2006. "There was a campaign against Ace, who, as a result, agreed to pay royalties, and not to print any more copies. But, as a result of being advised that he had lost his copyright, even before the Ace edition was issued, Tolkien began to revise The Lord of the Rings, so that there could be an authorised paperback which would be a new edition, and more importantly, a new edition for which he would still own the copyright. This was published by Ballentine [sic] Books in October 1965."
Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, especially #270, #273 and #277, ISBN 0-395-31555-7
Medievalist Comics and the American Century Archived 15 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine
"Notes on the text" pp. xi–xiii, Douglas A. Anderson, in the 1994 HarperCollins edition of The Fellowship of the Ring.
"The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion", Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull, HarperCollins (2005)
"Lord of the Rings Comparison". Archived from the original on 7 October 2017.
"Elrond's Library - Translations of Tolkien all over the world". www.elrondslibrary.fr. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2017.
Letters, 305f.; c.f. Martin Andersson "Lord of the Errors or, Who Really Killed the Witch-King?" Archived 6 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine
"The Lord of the Rings Boxed Set (Lord of the Rings Trilogy Series) section: Editorial reviews". Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
"From the Critics". Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 30 May 2006.
Auden, W. H. (22 January 1956). "At the End of the Quest, Victory". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
"Ken slater". Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 19 November 2019.
"Something to Read NSF 12". Retrieved 19 November 2019.
Shulevitz, Judith (22 April 2001). "Hobbits in Hollywood". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2006.
Jenkyns, Richard (28 January 2002). "Bored of the Rings". The New Republic. Retrieved 13 February 2011.
Derek Bailey (Director) and Judi Dench (Narrator) (1992). A Film Portrait of J. R. R. Tolkien (Television documentary). Visual Corporation.
Dyson's actual comment, bowdlerized in the TV version, was "Not another fucking Elf!" Grovier, Kelly (29 April 2007). "In the Name of the Father". The Observer. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
Seiler, Andy (16 December 2003). "'Rings' comes full circle". USA Today. Archived from the original on 12 February 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2006.
Diver, Krysia (5 October 2004). "A lord for Germany". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 28 March 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2006.
Cooper, Callista (5 December 2005). "Epic trilogy tops favourite film poll". ABC News Online. Archived from the original on 16 January 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2006.
O'Hehir, Andrew (4 June 2001). "The book of the century". Salon. Archived from the original on 13 February 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2006.
C. S. Lewis, quoted in Christina Scull & Wayne Hammond (2006), The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide, HarperCollins, article 'The Lord of the Rings', § Reviews, p. 549; ISBN 978-0-618-39113-4
The Lord of the Rings: The Mythology of Power, (Revised Edition, by Jane Chance, copyright 2001). University Press of Kentucky, cited in "Influences on "The Lord of the Rings"". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.
Tolkien, J. R. R. from Encyclopedia of Science, Technology, and Ethics. Macmillan Reference USA. Cited in "J. R. R. Tolkien Summary". BookRags. Archived from the original on 29 August 2008.
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1991). The Lord of the Rings. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-261-10238-9.
Yatt, John (2 December 2002). "Wraiths and Race". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 25 May 2010.
Bhatia, Shyam (8 January 2003). "The Lord of the Rings rooted in racism". Rediff India Abroad. Archived from the original on 3 November 2010. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
Straubhaar, Sandra Ballif. "Myth, Late Roman history and Multiculturalism in Tolkien's Middle Earth". In Chance, Jane (ed.). Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader. p. 113.
Curry, Patrick (2004). Defending Middle-earth: Tolkien: Myth and Modernity. Houghton Mifflin. pp. 30–33. ISBN 0-312-17671-6.
Chism, Christine (2007). "Race and Ethnicity in Tolkien's Works". In Michael Drout (ed.). J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia.
Chism, Christine (2007). "Racism, Charges of". In Michael Drout (ed.). J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia.
Rearick, Anderson (Winter 2004). "Why is the Only Good Orc a Dead Orc? The Dark Face of Racism in Tolkien's World". Modern Fiction Studies. p. 861.
Magoun, John (2007). "The South". In Michael Drout (ed.). J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia. p. 622.
Tolkien, J.R.R. (1987). The Two Towers, The Lord of the Rings. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. p. 661. ISBN 978-0-544-27344-3.
"The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers". IMDB. 2002. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2017.
Brin, David (December 2002). "We Hobbits are a Merry Folk: an incautious and heretical re-appraisal of J.R.R. Tolkien". Salon Magazine. Archived from the original on 23 March 2006. Retrieved 9 January 2006.[verification needed]
Moorcock, Michael. "Epic Pooh". Archived from the original on 24 March 2008. Retrieved 27 January 2006.
Shippey, T. A. The Roots of Tolkien's Middle Earth (review) Tolkien Studies – Volume 4, 2007, pp. 307–311
Williams, Stan. "20 Ways 'The Lord of the Rings' Is Both Christian and Catholic". Catholic Education Resource Center. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013.
Bower, Jody G. "'The Lord of the Rings' – An Archetypal Hero's Journey". Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
Drout 2006, p. 15.
See also interview in "Show" magazine vol. 1, Number 1 1970
"Beatles plan for Rings film". CNN. 28 March 2002. Archived from the original on 9 April 2002.
Taylor, Patrick (19 January 2014). Best Films Never Made #8: John Boorman's The Lord of the Rings." Archived 16 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine OneRoomWithaView.com. Retrieved 16 December 2018.
Masters, Tim (30 April 2009). "Making Middle-earth on a shoestring". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 1 May 2009.
Sydell, Laura (30 April 2009). "High-Def 'Hunt For Gollum' New Lord of the Fanvids". All Things Considered. NPR. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 1 May 2009.
Lamont, Tom (7 March 2010). "Born of Hope – and a lot of charity". The Guardian. London, England: Guardian Media Group. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2015.
Axon, Samuel (13 November 2017). "Amazon will run a multi-season Lord of the Rings prequel TV series". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017.
"Welcome to the Second Age:https://amazon.com/lotronprime". @LOTRonPrime. 7 March 2019. Archived from the original on 10 February 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2020.
Gonzalez, Sandra (13 November 2017). "Amazon announces 'Lord of the Rings' TV show". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017.
Koblin, John (13 November 2017). "'Lord of the Rings' Series Coming to Amazon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 7 April 2018.
"Amazon's Lord of the Rings Series Will Be Set in the Second Age".
"Narnia Fans: John Howe interview". Archived from the original on 20 March 2020.
"Amazon's 'Lord of the Rings' Will Be the Most Expensive Television Show Ever Made". Fortune. Archived from the original on 8 April 2018. Retrieved 8 April 2018.
Walls, Jason (2 July 2019). "Announcement on Amazon producing the Lord of the Rings TV show in NZ is 'imminent'". New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.
"NZ nearly lost Amazon's Lord of the Rings production after Christchurch attacks". Stuff.co.nz. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.
Cuming, Angela (18 September 2019). "Amazon's Lord of the Rings TV show to be filmed in New Zealand". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019.
Skipwith, David (18 September 2019). "Lord of the Rings TV series: Amazon confirms production will be filmed in Auckland". New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019.
Kroll, Justin (17 December 2019). "'Lord of the Rings' Series Taps Morfydd Clark as Young Galadriel (EXCLUSIVE)." Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Variety. Retrieved 22 January 2020.
D'Alessandro, Anthony (14 January 2020). "'The Lord Of The Rings': Amazon Studios Sets Series Cast – TCA". Deadline. Archived from the original on 7 March 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020.
Nellie Andreeva (4 March 2020). "'The Lord Of the Rings': Maxim Baldry Set As A Lead In Amazon Series". Deadline. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2020.
ISBN 1-4025-1627-4
Carter, Lin (1978). The Year's Best Fantasy Stories: 4. New York: DAW Books. pp. 207–208.
Gygax, Gary. "Gary Gygax – Creator of Dungeons & Dragons". The One Ring.net. Archived from the original on 27 June 2006. Retrieved 28 May 2006.
"The Gamasutra Quantum Leap Awards: Role-Playing Games". Honorable Mention: Dragon Warrior. Gamasutra. 6 October 2006. Archived from the original on 13 March 2011. Retrieved 28 March 2011.
Kalata, Kurt. "The History of Dragon Quest". Gamasutra. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2009.
Douglass, Perry (17 May 2006). "The Influence of Literature and Myth in Videogames". IGN. New York City: News Corp. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2012.
Martin, Brett A. S. (6 September 2012). "Using the Imagination: Consumer Evoking and Thematizing of the Fantastic Imaginary" (PDF). Journal of Consumer Research. 31. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. pp. 136–14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2012.
Tolkien had recorded a version of his theme on a friend's tape recorder in 1952. This was later issued by Caedmon Records in 1975 as part of J.R.R. Tolkien reads and sings The Lord of the Rings (LP recording TC1478).
Tolkien, J.R.R.; Swann, Donald (1967). The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle. New York City: Ballantine Books.
Tolkien, J.R.R.; Swann, Donald (1967), Poems and Songs of Middle Earth (LP recording), New York City: Caedmon Records, TC1231/TC91231
Snider, Charles (2008). The Strawberry Bricks Guide to Progressive Rock. Strawberry Bricks. pp. 120–121. ISBN 978-0-615-17566-9.
Greene, Andy (16 August 2017). "Ramble On: Rockers Who Love 'The Lord of the Rings'". Rolling Stone. New York City: Wenner Media LLC. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017.
Feist, Raymond (2001). Meditations on Middle-earth. New York city: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-30290-8.
Carpenter, Humphrey (2000). J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0-618-05702-1.
"Tolkien sold film rights for £10,000". London Evening Standard. 12 July 2001. Archived from the original on 14 September 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2011.
Pulley, Brett (15 July 2009). "'Hobbit' Heirs Seek $220 Million for 'Rings' Rights (Update1)". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2011.
Harlow, John (28 May 2008). "Hobbit movies meet dire foe in son of Tolkien". The Times Online. London: The Times. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2008.
Mathijs, Ernest (2006). The Lord of the Rings: Popular Culture in Global Context. Wallflower Press. p. 25. ISBN 1-904764-82-7.
Carmel, Julia (15 February 2020). ""Barbara Remington, Illustrator of Tolkien Book Covers, Dies at 90"". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 July 2020.

    "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. 5 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019. "The reveal kickstarts the BBC's year-long celebration of literature."

Further reading

    Carter, Lin (1969). Tolkien: A Look Behind The Lord of the Rings. Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-27539-X.
    Day, David (2004). The World of Tolkien: Mythological Sources of the Lord of the Rings. Gramercy Books. ISBN 978-0-517-22317-8.
    Drout, Michael D. C. (2006). J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-96942-0.
    Foster, Robert (1978). The Complete Guide to Middle-Earth: from "The Hobbit" through "The lord of the Rings" and Beyond. Rev. and enl. ed. Ballantine Books. N.B.: An alphabetical dictionary of personages and lore in this body of works by J. R. R. Tolkien. ISBN 0-7394-3297-4 hdbk.
    Hammond, Wayne G.; Christina Scull (2005). The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion. Houghton Mifflin Co. ISBN 0-618-64267-6.
    Glyer, Diana Pavlac (2007). The Company They Keep: C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien as Writers in Community. Kent State University Press. ISBN 0-87338-890-9.
    Christina Scull and Wayne G. Hammond, The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide (2006), ISBN 0-618-39113-4
    Christopher Tolkien (ed.), The History of The Lord of the Rings, 4 vols (1988–1992).
    J. R. R. Tolkien, On Fairy Stories

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Lord of the Rings.
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: The Lord of the Rings
	Wikivoyage has a travel guide for The Lord of the Rings tourism.

    Tolkien website of Harper Collins (the British publisher)
    Tolkien website of Houghton Mifflin (the American publisher)
    Lord of the Rings, The at the Encyclopedia of Fantasy
    The Encyclopedia of Arda: An Interactive Guide to the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien

    vte

J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings

    vte

J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium

    vte

J. R. R. Tolkien

    vte

Books I Love Best Yearly: Older Readers Award
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    BNE: XX3049459 BNF: cb11939715m (data) GND: 4124318-3 LCCN: no97079452 MusicBrainz work: ccefd76a-b870-4ed0-aa04-d391c8e98cb6 NKC: aun2006373559 NLI: 001788889 VIAF: 184093601 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 184093601

Categories:

    The Lord of the RingsMythopoeia1954 fantasy novels1954 British novelsEnglish novelsBritish adventure novelsSequel novelsEpic novelsBritish fantasy novelsBritish novels adapted into filmsBILBY Award-winning worksAllen & Unwin booksThree-volume novelsMiddle-earth booksHigh fantasy novelsEnglish fantasy novelsFiction about invisibilityNovels set in fictional countriesMiddle-earthBooks by J. R. R. TolkienNovels set in prehistory

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Current events
    Random article
    About Wikipedia
    Contact us
    Donate

Contribute

    Help
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Upload file

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Cite this page
    Wikidata item

Print/export

    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commonson_pushButton_search_clicked()
    Wikiquote
    Wikivoyage



Edit links

    This page was last edited on 21 July 2020, at 15:36 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki


